Google’s Fuchsia OS

Fuchsia is an open source capability-based operating system currently being developed by Google. It first became known to us when the project appeared on a self hosted form of git in August 2016 without any official announcement. The source documentation describes the reasoning behind the name as "Pink + Purple == Fuchsia (a new Operating System)", which is a reference to Pink (Apple's first effort at a object-oriented, microkernel based operating system), and Purple (the original iPhone's codename). In contrast to prior Google-developed operating systems such as Chrome OS and Android, which are based on the Linux kernel, Fuchsia is based on a new microkernel called Zircon, named after the mineral.

The first and foremost factor that separates Fuchsia from other operating systems is its code base. Unlike Windows, Android and iOS/mac OS, Fuchsia is not based on existing open source kernels or foundation code architectures. Rather, it uses its own open source kernel, which can have far larger implications than just being a differentiating factor. It uses the Zircon kernel, which was initially named Magenta, as its base protocol, which means that it is functionally different from all the operating systems out there.

The second factor that highlights Fuchsia's importance is its modular structure, and its real-time, capability-based operating method. Fuchsia OS is being built by Google as an operating system that can adapt to practically any form factor of a device, and accept multiple input formats (touch, voice, gestures or physical inputs). Being a real time operating system further means that is is prepared for constant connectivity to the internet. This enables two further aspects -- one, system updates happening consistently in the background without user interference and improving safety standards, and two, the ability to interact with other devices within a network setup and maximising a smart things ecosystem.

Fuchsia's user interface and apps are written with Flutter, a software development kit allowing cross-platform development abilities for Fuchsia, Android and iOS. Flutter produces apps based on Dart, offering apps with high performance that run at 120 frames per second. Flutter also offers a Vulkan-based graphics rendering engine called Escher, with specific support for "Volumetric soft shadows", an element that Ars Technica wrote "seems custom-built to run Google's shadow-heavy 'Material Design' interface guidelines".

Due to the Flutter software development kit offering cross-platform opportunities, users are able to install parts of Fuchsia on Android devices. Ars Technica noted that, while users could test Fuchsia, nothing "works", adding that "it's all a bunch of placeholder interfaces that don't do anything", though finding multiple similarities between Fuchsia's interface and Android, including a Recent Apps screen, a Settings menu, and a split-screen view for viewing multiple apps at once. A special version of Android Runtime for Fuchsia will be developed. It will run on machines with this system from a FAR file, the equivalent of the Android APK.

Fuchsia is based on a new microkernel called Zircon. Zircon is derived from Little Kernel, a small operating system intended for embedded systems. "Little Kernel" was developed by Travis Geiselbrecht, a creator of the NewOS kernel used by Haiku. Zircon was previously known as Magenta and it was designed to scale to any application from embedded RTOS (Real-Time Operating Systems) to mobile and desktop devices of all kinds. As a result, there has been much speculation that Fuchsia will be the natural successor to Android and Chrome OS, combining capabilities of both with backwards compatibility to run legacy applications built on either. In short, this thing is designed to run on anything from 32-bit or 64-bit ARM cores to 64-bit X86 processors and it has a potential to be rather disruptive.

Technically, this implies a sort-of super-OS that is compatible with the existing app ecosystems under Google's umbrella, can run on any embedded or mainstream system with interfaces that can be altered according to need, automatically patch system vulnerabilities with constant updates, and connect to devices of any form factor, thereby hosting a full environment of connected appliances.

While Fuchsia may not necessarily even become a consumer-oriented operating system, the foundation stones laid down by it can have a considerable impact on devices that you own. Right now, there are no non-Apple systems that can offer a complete ecosystem of operating systems with tight integration for laptops, smartphones, tablets, wearables, smart speakers and televisions, and as a user, our best bet would lie in a combination of Microsoft's Windows, Google's Android/Wear OS and Amazon's Fire OS for all gadgets combined.

While compatibility between services have improved over the years, the seamlessness of the integration is still nowhere close to the kind of end-user experience that Apple manages to provide within its ecosystem. With Fuchsia, all that may soon change. As a consumer, we are looking at an OS that can be the working backbone of every device that you use in future -- be it a smart television, a connected bulb, or even your smartphone. It might not really send Android to oblivion, which Google might choose to retain as the commercial label for marketing and relatability factors should there be a larger engineering shift in the OS. But, it can establish a full ecosystem that is as tightly-knit as Apple's.

It is this that makes Fuchsia OS' developments so important to the future of computing, because this may lead to a three-way race in the computing world, where each of Apple, Google and Microsoft's ecosystems are cross-compatible, and at the same time, fully self-sufficient. It is this that may also bring about significant changes to the way we work -- after all, haven't we always wanted the finesse of mac OS, the versatility of Android and the wide flexibility of Windows combined in one.

